The Avengers
The Asgardian Loki encountered the Other, the leader of an extraterrestrial race known as the Chitauri. In exchange for retrieving the Tesseract,2 a powerful energy source of unknown potential, the Other promises Loki an army with which he could subjugate Earth. Nick Fury, director of the espionage agency S.H.I.E.L.D., and his lieutenant Agent Maria Hill arrived at a remote research facility during an evacuation, where physicist Dr. Erik Selvig was leading a research team experimenting on the Tesseract. Agent Phil Coulson explained that the object had begun radiating an unusual form of energy. The Tesseract suddenly activated and opened a wormhole, allowing Loki to reach Earth. Loki took the Tesseract and used his scepter to enslave Selvig and a couple of agents, including Clint Barton, to aid him in his getaway.

In response to the attack, Fury reactivated the “Avengers Initiative”. Agent Natasha Romanoff was sent to Calcutta to recruit Dr. Bruce Banner to trace the Tesseract through its gamma radiation emissions. Coulson visited Tony Stark to have him review Selvig’s research, and Fury approached Steve Rogers with an assignment to retrieve the Tesseract.

In Stuttgart, Barton stole iridium needed to stabilize the Tesseract’s power while Loki caused a distraction, leading to a confrontation with Rogers, Stark, and Romanoff that ends with Loki’s surrender. While Loki was being escorted to S.H.I.E.L.D., Thor, his adoptive brother, arrived and released him, hoping to convince him to abandon his plan and returned to Asgard. After a confrontation with Stark and Rogers, Thor agreed to take Loki to S.H.I.E.L.D.’s flying aircraft carrier, the Helicarrier. There Loki was imprisoned while Banner and Stark attempted to locate the Tesseract.

The Avengers became divided, both over how to approach Loki and the revelation that S.H.I.E.L.D. planned to harness the Tesseract to develop weapons as a deterrent against hostile extraterrestrials. As the group argues, Barton and Loki’s other possessed agents attacked the Helicarrier, disabling its engines in flight and causing Banner to transform into the Hulk. Stark and Rogers tried to restart the damaged engine, and Thor attempted to stop the Hulk’s rampage. Romanoff fought Barton, and knocked him unconscious, breaking Loki’s mind control. Loki escaped after killing Coulson and ejecting Thor from the airship, while the Hulk fell down to the ground after attacking an S.H.I.E.L.D. fighter jet. Fury used Coulson’s death to motivate the Avengers into working as a team. Stark and Rogers realized that for Loki, simply defeating them would not be enough; he needed to overpower them publicly to validate himself as ruler of Earth. Loki used the Tesseract, in conjunction with a device Selvig built, to open a wormhole above Stark Tower to the Chitauri fleet in space, launching his invasion.

The Avengers assembled in defense of New York City, the wormhole’s location, but quickly realize they would be overwhelmed by wave after wave of Chitauri descended upon Earth. Banner arrived and transformed into the Hulk, and together he, Rogers, Stark, Thor, Barton, and Romanoff fought the Chitauri while evacuating civilians. The Hulk found Loki and smacked him into submission. Romanoff made her way to the wormhole generator, where Selvig, freed of Loki’s control, revealed that Loki’s scepter could be used to shut down the generator. Meanwhile, Fury’s superiors attempted to end the invasion by launching a nuclear missile at Midtown Manhattan. Stark intercepted the missile and took it through the wormhole toward the Chitauri fleet. The missile detonated, destroying the Chitauri mothership and disabling their forces on Earth. Stark’s suit run out of power, and he fell back through the wormhole just as Romanoff closed it. Stark went into freefall, but the Hulk saved him from crashing to the ground. In the aftermath, Thor returned Loki and the Tesseract to Asgard, while Fury expressed confidence that the Avengers would return if and when they were needed.